Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is
a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please
subscribe to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free
series of videos. Thanks for your help. In this
video we’ll continue our look at wireless LANs.
In the previous video we looked at various
fundamental concepts of wireless networking,
but in this video we’ll look at some more
specifics, specifically wireless architectures.
By architectures, I mean how the wireless
network fits in to the greater picture of the
network as a whole, including the wired network
infrastructure. We’ll cover exam topic 1.1d,
access points, 1.1.e, controllers,
as well as 2.6, 2.7, and 2.8.
Here’s what we’ll cover. Before covering wireless
architectures, we’ll take a quick look at 802.11
messages and the 802.11 frame format. 802.11
wireless LANs function differently than 802.3
wired Ethernet LANs, so there are some
unique message types and the frame format
is different as well. Then we’ll cover different
wireless access point architectures. Autonomous,
lightweight, and cloud-based. Finally we’ll look
at different wireless LAN controller deployments.
We didn’t cover WLCs in the previous video.
They are used to centrally manage and control
access points, and are essential in large
networks which can have hundreds or even
thousands of wireless access points. Make
sure to watch until the end of the video
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So let’s look at the 802.11 frame format first.
As you can see, it has a different format than an
802.3 Ethernet frame. 802.11 frames are
more complicated than ethernet frames,
but for the CCNA you don’t have to learn it in as
much detail as the Ethernet and IP headers. So,
I’ll just provide a high-level overview. First
of all, there are many more fields in the 802.11
header than an Ethernet header, but depending on
the 802.11 version and the message type, some of
the fields might not be present in the frame. For
example, there are 4 different address fields,
but not all messages use all 4 address fields.
Okay, let’s look at each field briefly. First,
frame control. It’s 2 bytes, 16 bits, in
length. It provides information such as the
message type and subtype. I’ll talk about
the different 802.11 message types later.
Next is the Duration/ID field. As the name
implies, this 2-byte field has a few purposes.
Depending on the message type it can indicate
the time in microseconds the channel will be
dedicated for transmission of the frame. Or
it can be an identifier for the association,
the connection, between the wireless
client and AP. You could say that this
field is similar to the Ethernet type/length
field, because it has two different purposes.
Next up the addresses. Up to four addresses
can be present in an 802.11 frame.
Which addresses are present, and their
order, depends on the message type.
The four addresses that can be
present are the destination address,
DA. This is the final recipient of the frame. The
source address, SA. This is the original sender.
The receiver address, RA. This is the immediate
recipient of the frame, but not necessarily the
final destination. And the transmitter address,
TA. This is the immediate sender of the frame,
but not necessarily the original sender,
the original source of the frame.
Having four addresses like this isn’t
necessary in a wired Ethernet network,
but 802.11 wireless networks have unique
requirements. The next field is sequence
control. It’s used to reassemble fragments and
eliminate duplicate frames. Then there’s QoS
control, which as you probably guessed is
used in QoS to prioritize certain traffic.
After that is a field called HT, high throughput,
control. This was added in 802.11n to enable high
throughout operations. I didn’t mention
this in the previous video, but 802.11n,
Wi-Fi 4, is also known as high throughput
Wi-Fi. And after it 802.11ac, Wi-Fi 5,
is also known as Very High Throughput, VHT, Wi-Fi.
So, HT control is the last field of the header,
and after it is the frame body, which is the
packet encapsulated within the 802.11 frame.
And finally there is the FCS, frame
check sequence, in the trailer.
Just like in an Ethernet frame, this is used to
check for errors in the frame. And that’s all
for 802.11 frames. Remember, not all of these
fields are present in all 802.11 messages.
It all depends on the version of 802.11 being used
and the message type. Like I said, these frames
and their operations can be much more complicated
than Ethernet frames. If you want to be an expert
in wireless networks you should definitely learn
all the details, but that’s enough for now.
Next, before 802.11 message types, I want
to introduce the 802.11 association process,
which I only briefly mentioned in the last video.
Access points are used to bridge traffic
between wireless stations and other devices,
for example hosts connected to the wired network.
But for a station to send traffic through the AP,
it must be associated with the AP, and there is a
process used to do that, to form that connection.
There are three connection states. First, when
the station is not authenticated or associated
with the AP. Second, when the station is
authenticated but not yet associated with the AP.
And finally, when the station is authenticated
and associated with the AP. The station must
be authenticated and associated with the AP to
send traffic through it. So, let’s look at a
simple version of that process. First, the station
sends a probe request message to learn about what
APs and BSSs are available, and the AP sends
a probe response to say that it is available.
Note that there are actually two ways for a
station to scan for a BSS. First is active
scanning, where the station sends probe requests
and listens for a probe response from an AP.
That’s what I show in the diagram on the left.
But there is also passive scanning, in which the
station listens for beacon messages from an AP.
Beacons are sent periodically by APs to advertise
the BSS. Okay, so using either active or passive
scanning, the station knows about the AP and its
BSS. However it’s still in that first connection
state, not authenticated and not associated.
Then there is an authentication exchange, for
example the station sends a password to the AP,
and the AP authenticates it. If this is
successful, we have reached the second state,
authenticated but not yet associated. Finally,
there is an association request and response,
and if this is successful we have
reached the final connection state,
authenticated and associated. Finally the
station can send traffic through the AP.
Now, all of these messages, probe,
beacon, authentication, and association,
are the same type of 802.11 message.
Let’s look at the different types.
There are three 802.11 message types.
First there are management frames which
are used to manage the BSS. For example, the
messages I introduced in the previous slide,
beacon, probe, authentication, and
association, are all management frames.
There are more management messages than these,
but I won’t introduce them all. The second type
is control. These frames are used to control
access to the medium, the radio frequency. They
assist with the delivery of management and data
frames. For example, request to send and clear to
send messages, which I very briefly mentioned
in the previous video, are control messages.
Also, ACK messages, used to acknowledge that
a message was received, are control frames.
The third type of message is data. These are
the messages used to send actual data packets.
Okay, here’s a brief overview of
the information we just covered.
I can’t say exactly which information you’ll be
tested on in the CCNA exam, but I think it’s a
good idea to have a basic understanding of these
topics. Okay, let’s move on to the next topic.
First up we are going to talk about different ways
of deploying, of using, wireless access points.
There are three main wireless AP deployment
methods. Autonomous, lightweight, and cloud-based.
I’ll introduce autonomous APs first. Autonomous
APs are self-contained systems that don’t rely
on a WLC, wireless LAN controller. Hence the
name autonomous, they are independent. And
that means they are configured individually.
They can be configured by console cable,
remotely via telnet or SSH, or also an HTTP or
HTTPS web connection via a web browser GUI. For
small networks this is fine, but configuring
APs individually in a large network quickly
becomes unrealistic. Note that an IP address for
remote management should be configured on the APs,
so you can connect via telnet, SSH, or HTTP to
configure them. Radio frequency parameters, such
as how much power it should use to transmit and
which channel it should use, must be configured
manually per AP. Security policies, for example
ACLs, are also handled individually by each AP.
Other settings such as QoS are also configured
per AP. And there is no central monitoring or
management of the APs. So, as I said before,
each AP is its own self-contained system.
Here’s an example network with autonomous
APs. When using autonomous APs, each AP
should connect to the wired network with a
trunk link. In this case there are two SSIDs,
so it might be obvious that a trunk connection
is needed because each SSID is mapped to a VLAN,
but even if the AP provides only one SSID,
the connection should be a trunk. Why is that?
It’s because the management traffic used
to remotely connect to the wireless APs,
as well as the other devices, the
switches, should be in a separate VLAN.
I might not have mentioned this earlier in the
course, but it’s best practice to keep management
traffic separate from regular data traffic
by putting it in a separate subnet and VLAN.
So, there are trunk links between each of
these switches carrying VLANs 10 and 20
for the wireless clients, as well as VLAN99 for
management traffic. When using autonomous APs,
data traffic from wireless clients has a very
direct path to the wired network or to other
wireless clients associated with the same AP.
This statement might be a little unclear, but
you’ll understand it when you see the path that
data takes when using a wireless LAN controller.
So, with an autonomous AP traffic between these
PCs simply goes from PC to AP, among the switches,
and then to the other AP and PC. Or between
devices associated with the same AP,
there’s no need for the traffic to even go
to the wired network. Soon you’ll see how
this is different compared to the traffic
path when using a wireless LAN controller.
Notice that each VLAN has to stretch across the
entire local area network. This is considered a
bad practice. Why is that? Why is it bad to have
the same VLAN stretched across the whole network?
Well, there are many reasons, but here are a
few. First, large broadcast domains. Each VLAN
is a broadcast domain, and if the VLANs are
stretched across the whole network like this
each broadcast message will be
flooded throughout the whole network.
The second reason is that
spanning tree will disable links.
A big focus of modern network design is
avoiding spanning tree as much as possible,
because disabling links means a reduction in total
bandwidth. Also, adding and deleting VLANs is very
labor-intensive if it has to be done over dozens
of switches in a large network. So, to summarize,
autonomous APs can be used in small networks, but
they are not viable in medium to large networks.
A large network can have thousands of APs,
and configuring and managing each of those
APs one-by-one is not realistic. Finally,
remember that autonomous APs can also function
in the modes covered in the previous video,
repeater, outdoor bridge, or workgroup bridge.
Now let’s talk about the next major deployment
model for APs, lightweight APs. The functions
of an AP can be split between the AP and a
wireless LAN controller, WLC. The lightweight APs
handle real-time operations like transmitting
and receiving radio frequency traffic,
encryption and decryption of traffic,
sending out beacons and probes, etc.
However, other functions are carried out by
a WLC, for example RF management, security
and QoS management, client authentication,
client association and roaming management,
etc. The WLC centrally controls all of
these things for many lightweight APs.
This is called split-MAC architecture,
split media access control,
because the functions are split between the
lightweight APs and the WLC. Note that the WLC is
also used to centrally configure the lightweight
APs. No more need to log into the CLI of each AP
and manually configure them one-by-one,
it’s all done centrally from the WLC.
Note that the WLC can be located in the same
subnet and VLAN as the lightweight APs it manages,
or in a different subnet and VLAN. I’ll talk about
different WLC deployments later. Note that the WLC
and lightweight APs authenticate each other using
digital certificates installed on each device.
These certificates follow the X.509 standard,
which is the same that websites use to prove their
authenticity over the Internet. This ensures that
only authorized APs can join the network, so an
attacker can’t make their AP join the network.
Here’s an example network, with a wireless
LAN controller added this time. The WLC and
lightweight APs use a protocol called CAPWAP,
control and provisioning of wireless access
points, to communicate. CAPWAP is based on
an older protocol called LWAPP, lightweight
access point protocol. For communications, two
tunnels are created between each AP and the WLC,
like this. Note that each of
those tunnels in the diagram
represents two separate tunnels,
each used for different purposes.
So, let’s see what those two tunnels are. One is
the control tunnel, and it uses UDP port 5246.
There’s another port number for you to remember,
CAPWAP control tunnels use UDP port 5246.
So, this tunnel is used to configure the
APs and control and manage their operations.
Note that all traffic in this tunnel is
encrypted by default, so it is secure.
The second tunnel is the data tunnel, using UDP
port 5247. All traffic from wireless clients is
sent through this tunnel to the WLC. It does not
go directly to the wired network, or even directly
to another client associated with the same AP.
It must go through the tunnel to the WLC first.
Now, of course in reality the traffic does pass
through the wired network to go to the WLC.
However it is encapsulated with new headers to
form the tunnel, just like I showed with GRE and
IPsec tunnels in the WAN video. Note that traffic
in this tunnel is not encrypted by default,
but you can configure it to be encrypted using
a protocol called DTLS, datagram transport
layer security. I mentioned TLS, transport
layer security, briefly in the WAN video.
DTLS is basically the same thing, but it
uses UDP, whereas regular TLS uses TCP.
Now, here’s another difference between
lightweight and autonomous APs.
Because all traffic from wireless clients
is tunneled to the WLC with CAPWAP,
APs connect to switch access ports, not
trunk ports. You could make a trunk link
if you want, but there’s no need for
multiple VLANs to cross that link.
To make that clear, let me demonstrate the
traffic flow when using split-MAC architecture.
Okay, I’ve simplified the diagrams. On the
left we have a split-MAC architecture, with
a lightweight AP and a WLC. On the right we have
an autonomous AP architecture, sometimes called a
local-MAC architecture. As you know, when using
autonomous APs they must connect to the network
with a trunk link. There should be a VLAN for
each SSID the AP offers, as well as a VLAN for
network device management. If a wireless client
wants to send traffic out to an external network,
it sends the frame to its wireless access point,
which then forwards it to the default gateway over
the wired network, which will then forward it
according to its routing table. And if a client
wants to send traffic to another device associated
with the same AP, the traffic has to need to enter
the wired network. The frame is sent to the AP
and then simply forwarded to the destination.
When using a split-MAC architecture, this is all
very different. As I said before the AP doesn’t
have to connect to the switch with a trunk, an
access link is fine. However, a trunk link is
needed to connect the WLC to the wired network. In
this case, instead of the AP mapping each SSID to
a VLAN and forming the border between the wired
and wireless network, the WLC takes that role.
Traffic from a wireless client is sent to the
AP and then tunneled to the WLC. Then the WLC
sends it over the wired network to the default
gateway, which will forward it as appropriate.
Even if the traffic is destined for a host
associated with the same AP, it is first tunneled
to the WLC, and then tunneled back and sent to
the destination. Okay, hopefully that helped
demonstrate the differences between the traffic
paths used by each of the two architectures.
There are some key benefits to using a split-MAC
architecture. This isn’t a complete list and you
don’t have to memorize it, but you should
be aware of what benefits are provided.
First, scalability. With a WLC, or even multiple
WLCs in large networks, it’s much simpler to build
and support a network with thousands of APs. That
would simply not be feasible with autonomous APs.
WLCs also provide dynamic channel assignment.
The WLC can automatically select which channel
each AP should use, so you don’t have to
manually plan which channel each will use.
The WLC can also automatically set the appropriate
transmit power for each AP, to provide sufficient
coverage without interfering with other APs.
The WLC can also provide self-healing wireless
coverage. So, when an AP stops functioning, the
WLC can increase the transmit power of nearby APs
to avoid coverage holes. Seamless roaming is also
provided, so clients can roam between APs with no
noticeable delay. Another benefit is client load
balancing. So, if a client is in range of two APs,
the WLC can associate the client with the
least-used AP, to balance the load among APs. And
the last benefit I’ll mention is security and QoS
management. Central management of security and QoS
policies ensures consistency across the network.
As I said, you don’t have to memorize this list,
but definitely be aware that the split-MAC
architecture offers various benefits.
Now, just as autonomous APs can function as
repeaters, outdoor bridges, etc, lightweight
APs have different modes as well. First is local
mode. This is the default mode where the AP offers
a BSS, or multiple BSSs for clients to associate
with. So, this is the standard operational mode
of an AP. Next is FlexConnect mode. In this mode
the AP also offers one or more BSSs for clients to
associate with, but it adds extra functionality.
It allows the AP to locally switch, to locally
forward traffic between the wired and wireless
networks if the tunnels to the WLC go down.
So, here on the left are some standard
traffic paths used with lightweight APs.
All traffic is tunneled to the WLC first.
But what if connectivity to the WLC is lost,
causing the tunnels to go down? That’s not
a problem if FlexConnect is enabled, because
the AP can start forwarding the frames locally
like an autonomous AP, no need to tunnel the
traffic to the WLC. Okay, that’s FlexConnect mode.
The next mode is sniffer mode. In this mode
the AP does not offer a BSS for clients.
Instead it is dedicated to capturing 802.11 frames
and sending them to a device running software
such as Wireshark. So, it listens to wireless
traffic and then sends those packets to
packet capture software for analysis.
The next mode is Monitor mode. Again, it doesn’t
offer a BSS for clients. Instead it is dedicated
to receiving 802.11 frames to detect rogue
devices. If a client is found to be a rogue
device, an AP can send de-authentication messages
to disassociate the rogue device from the AP.
The next mode, rogue detector mode, is similar
but different in a key way. In this mode the
AP does not even use its radio. Instead it
listens to traffic on the wired network only,
but it receives a list of suspected rogue clients
and AP MAC addresses from the WLC. By listening to
ARP messages on the wired network and correlating
it with the information it receives from the WLC,
it can detect rogue devices. Okay, the next is
yet another mode that does not offer a BSS for
clients. That is SE-connect, or spectrum expert
connect. In this mode the AP is dedicated to RF
spectrum analysis on all channels. It can send
information to software such as Cisco Spectrum
Expert on a PC to collect and analyze the data.
This can help find sources of interference.
Okay, the next mode is bridge/mesh mode.
Like the autonomous AP’s outdoor bridge mode,
the lightweight AP can be a dedicated bridge
between sites, even over long distances. A mesh
can also be made between the access points.
Here’s an example similar to what we saw in the
previous video, APs connecting sites together.
And here’s an example that looks more like
a mesh, again connecting sites together over
potentially long distances. Now there’s
one more mode. That is flex plus bridge,
which basically adds flexconnect functionality
to the bridge/mesh mode. This allows wireless
access points to locally forward traffic
even if connectivity to the WLC is lost.
Here’s that complete list. This is a lot
of different modes and we only very briefly
looked at each one, but that’s okay. If you
want to know more about any of these modes
Cisco has documentation about each of them
and you can find it with a Google search,
but for the CCNA exam you should just be able to
identify the basic purpose of each of these modes.
I don’t recommend memorizing this list,
just understand the basic purpose of each.
Now let’s look at the last main type of AP
architecture, cloud-based. Cloud-based AP
architecture is in between autonomous AP and
split-MAC architecture, in terms of how it
functions. Basically, it involves autonomous
APs that are centrally managed in the cloud.
An example is Cisco Meraki, and because the
CCNA is a Cisco exam that’s probably the one
you should be aware of for the CCNA. The Meraki
dashboard, which is a website you login to,
can be used to configure APs, monitor the
network, generate performance reports,
etc. Just like I mentioned for WLCs, Meraki
also tells each AP which channel to use,
what transmit power to use, etc. However,
regular data traffic is not sent to the cloud.
It is sent directly to the wired
network like when using autonomous APs.
So, only what we call management traffic
or control traffic is sent to the cloud.
Let’s see an example. Information such as RF
spectrum information and management information
is sent to servers in the Meraki cloud.
But regular data traffic, such as two
PCs communicating with each other, is direct and
there is no need for it to be sent to the cloud.
So, I think you can see how the functionality
is in between autonomous and lightweight APs.
Here’s an image from Meraki demonstrating the same
concept. Notice that the Meraki management data,
the green arrow, is sent to the Meraki cloud.
However, user data, so regular traffic,
is sent directly to its intended destination
such as a web server or a file server.
Here’s another image from that same Meraki
webpage, giving a look at the Meraki dashboard.
This is where you monitor the wireless network,
make configuration changes to APs, etc.
I use the Cisco Meraki solution in my job and
I really like it. It’s easy to use and set up,
and the Meraki dashboard makes it easy to monitor
the wireless network and make changes as needed.
Okay, that’s all for the cloud-based
architecture. Like I said, it’s halfway
between autonomous AP and split-MAC architecture.
Autonomous APs that are centrally managed.
The final topic for today is WLC deployment
models. Since we’re talking about wireless
LAN controllers, this applies
to split-MAC architecture only,
not autonomous AP or cloud-based AP architectures.
There are four main WLC deployment models,
four ways to deploy a WLC in your network. I’ll
show each one with a diagram, but let’s summarize
them first. First, a unified WLC deployment. The
WLC is a hardware appliance, a separate hardware
device, in a central location of the network.
Then there is the cloud-based WLC deployment.
The WLC is a VM running on a server,
usually in a private cloud in a data center.
Keep in mind that this is not the same as the
cloud-based AP architecture we just discussed.
In this case the APs are not cloud-based, they
are lightweight APs. The ‘Cloud-based’ named
here simply refers to where the WLC is. In an
embedded WLC deployment, the WLC is integrated
in a switch in the network. And finally
in a Cisco Mobility Express deployment,
the WLC functionality is actually integrated
within one or more of the APs in the network.
So here is an example of a unified WLC, a
separate device, a separate hardware appliance,
that is deployed in a central location of the
network. A unified WLC can support up to about
6000 APs, and if you need more than that you can
add additional WLCs. This kind of deployment is
suitable for a large enterprise campus. Here’s
a photo of some different Cisco WLC models.
Of course the larger models are more powerful
and can support more APs than the smaller ones.
Next is the cloud-based WLC. In this case the
WLC is a VM running on a server, typically in
a private cloud in a data center. This kind of
WLC can typically support up to about 3000 APs,
and again if more are needed you can add
more WLC VMs. I’d like to repeat here that
a split-MAC architecture with a cloud-based WLC
is different than the cloud-based AP deployment
we looked at earlier. These are lightweight APs,
and cloud-based just refers to where the WLC is.
Next, embedded WLCs. In this case
the WLC is embedded within a switch.
This type of WLC can support up to about 200
APs, and if you need more you’ll have to add
more switches with embedded WLCs. Embedded
WLCs are suitable for smaller campuses.
Finally, Cisco Mobility Express places the WLC
within an AP. The AP containing the WLC builds
internal CAPWAP tunnels to it, and the other
APs do too. A mobility express WLC can support
up to about 100 APs, and you’ll have to add
more APs with embedded mobility express WLCs
to support more APs. This kind of deployment
is suitable for a small branch office.
Here’s that summary of the
different WLC deployment models,
and I’ve added information about how
many APs can be supported by each.
Definitely be familiar with these
four deployment types for the exam.
Okay, here’s what we covered in this video.
We started with a brief introduction to some
different kinds of 802.11 messages and the
frame format used by 802.11 wireless frames.
Because wireless networks have different
requirements than wired networks,
there are quite a few differences between 802.3
Ethernet frames and 802.11 wireless frames.
We then covered the three main kinds of APs,
autonomous, lightweight, and cloud-based. Make
sure you know the basic characteristics of each
and are able to compare them. Finally we looked at
the different wireless LAN controller deployment
options to be used with lightweight APs.
Make sure to watch until the end
of the quiz for a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for
CCNA. Okay, let’s go to quiz question 1.
What kind of message is an 802.11 probe request?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, management. Here are
those 802.11 message types we covered earlier,
with a few examples of each.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following AP
types are centrally managed?
Pause the video now to select
the best answer, select two.
Okay, the answers are C, lightweight, and D,
cloud-based. Lightweight APs are centrally managed
by a wireless LAN controller, and cloud-based APs
are centrally managed by a cloud server such
as Cisco Meraki. Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following AP
types uses the CAPWAP protocol?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, lightweight. Lightweight
APs use CAPWAP to communicate with the WLC via
two tunnels, a control tunnel and a data
tunnel. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following lightweight
AP modes offer a BSS for clients?
Pause the video to select
the best answers, select two.
Okay, the answers are A, local and C, flexconnect.
Local is the default standard operating mode.
FlexConnect offers the additional ability
to continue forwarding data traffic locally
even if the tunnels to the WLC go
down. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following WLC deployments
supports the greatest number of APs?
Pause the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, unified. Embedded WLCs
support about 200 APs, cloud-based about 3000,
mobility express about 100, and unified
about 6000. Okay, that’s all for the quiz.
Now let’s take a look at a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.